in patients whose cancer has improved following a course of chemotherapy pci has been shown to reduce the cumulative risk of brain metastases within one year from 40.4 to 14.6.
in small cell lung carcinoma cisplatin and etoposide are most commonly used.
with small cell lung carcinoma initial attempts in the 1960s at surgical resection and radical radiotherapy were unsuccessful.
more recently pci has also been shown to be beneficial in those with extensive small cell lung cancer.
it is done by inserting a small heat probe into the tumor to kill the tumor cells.
advances in cytotoxic drugs pharmacogenetics and targeted drug design show promise.
recent improvements in targeting and imaging have led to the development of extracranial stereotactic radiation in the treatment of early-stage lung cancer.
despite this discovery mining continued into the 1950s due to the ussrs demand for uranium.
a sufficient pre-operative respiratory reserve must be present to allow adequate lung function after the tissue is removed.
lung cancer was first recognized as a distinct disease in 1761.
the overall five-year survival for patients with sclc is about 5.
procedures include wedge resection removal of part of a lobe segmentectomy removal of an anatomic division of a particular lobe of the lung lobectomy one lobe bilobectomy two lobes or pneumonectomy whole lung.
prognostic factors in non- small-cell lung cancer include presence or absence of pulmonary symptoms tumor size cell type histology degree of spread stage and metastases to multiple lymph nodes and vascular invasion.
this classification based on histological criteria has important implications for clinical management and prognosis of the disease.
 surgery itself has an operative death rate of about 4.4 depending on the patients lung function and other risk factors.
radioactive iodine brachytherapy at the margins of wedge excision may reduce recurrence to that of lobectomy.
lung cancer incidence by country has an inverse correlation with sunlight and uvb exposure.
radiotherapy is often given together with chemotherapy and may be used with curative intent in patients with non-small cell lung carcinoma who are not eligible for surgery.
the use of adjuvant thoracic radiotherapy following curative intent surgery for non-small cell lung carcinoma is not well established and controversial.
a refinement of this technique is continuous hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy chart where a high dose of radiotherapy is given in a short time period.
the occurrence of lung cancer in non-smokers who account for fewer than 10 of cases appears to be due to a combination of genetic factors radon gas asbestos and air pollution including second-hand smoke.
primary chemotherapy is also given in metastatic non-small cell lung carcinoma.
one possible explanation is a preventative effect of vitamin d which is produced in the skin on exposure to sunlight.
an estimated 75 of former miners died from lung cancer